In 1997, we were in Bandon, Oregon. And would you
please tell me your full name, rank, and serial
number? Okay, my name is Lloyd G. Lyman, Jr. I was
born May 16, 1923. Where?
In Medford, Oregon. And your family, father, what
were they doing? My father was a bull of the woods.
He was a logging superintendent for the
California Fruit Growers Exchange, which is the
Sunkist Orange. They made boxes for Sunkist
Orange. Is that right? That was the excuse they had
for getting into the lumber business. And did you
have brothers and sisters? I had one sister who was
three years younger than I had. She lives in
Ashland today. And did you spend your young life in
Medford? I grew up in Medford, yes. I never left
home until I was left to go to college. And where did
you go to college? I went to Reed College in
Portland. R-E-E-I-D. No, double E. R-E-E-D,
okay. How did you get to Reed College? On a
scholarship. Is that a presidential?
Non-denominational, yeah. It's like... It's a
good school. It's similar to Swarthmore, or to the
little Ivy League schools, or something like
that. It's a good school. What is it, about 1,200,
1,400, 1,500, or more? I think it's about 1,200
now, but when I went there, it was less than... 500.
Oh, is that right? Yeah, the entering classes were
limited to 100, and they never graduated more than
about 70. So, but that all changed with World War
II, because for one thing, people like myself, it
took me eight years to get through school. When did
you start? 1940. Okay, you entered the class in
1940, and then what happened? Then, three years
into that, I went into the Navy, and I was in the Navy
for a couple of years. You enlisted, drafted, all
of your bombs. I was a 90-day wonder. Oh, is that
right? Yeah. I started out as a naval aviation
cadet, got washed out, and got a commission as a
deck officer. Did you go to sea? I went to, I spent
about a year and a half in the Pacific, at the end of
the war in the South Pacific, on a landing craft. I
was a landing boat officer on the A.K.A. 71. Okay.
I tell you, Of course, I came along a bit later, but
you know, he said, for assignment I wanted sea duty
in the Pacific. I got shore duty in the Atlantic. I
really did. I really wanted to destroy it. Oh, what
a great life that would have been. Well, I tried to,
I think I saved my life by getting washed out of the
Naval Aviation, I couldn't land to a spot. If I was
in the Air Force, I could have been okay, because
they come in and they don't stall out over us. I was
stationed in Jacksonville Naval Air Station.
Those guys are insane. They drink all night and
cry all day. So you're in service, you go to, you're
in Tokyo, in Japan. We were in the first, at the end
of the war, we were in Subic Bay, practicing to land
in Japan, to attack Japan when the war ended. So we
were all loaded up. And we were the first task force
into Japan when the war ended. And we were in Japan
the day that MacArthur was on the Missouri. We went
to sail right past the stern of the Iowa that he was
on. I forget the name of the battleship. Missouri.
It was the Missouri, yes. Yeah, it was the
Missouri. And I remember seeing that peglated
little Japanese guy that surrendered. It was one
of the officers that surrendered. He only had one
leg. And we went right, our ship went right up past
the stern during all these ceremonies. That's
memorable. Yeah, that was memorable. And then how
long did you stay in Japan? Well, after that we took
Japanese troops that were in Manchuria back to
Japan. evacuated them. On American ships? Yes, on
the A.K.A.s. A.K.A. is the Cargo Attack. And then
we took Chinese nationalist troops out of Hong
Kong to North China to feed them to the communists.
We unloaded. We made about five or six trips to
places like Tsingtao
Tsing-Wang-Tao, and a whole bunch of northern
ports. You don't think about that? That would have
been part of the end of the war? Well, no, they were
fighting. This was when the communists were
coming out of it. Oh, okay. That war had already
started. Yes, they were headed for trouble.
Anyhow, that's when we came home. And so you got out
of service in Muscovado, where you probably went.
Well, it must have been 1946,
and then I went back to Reed, and another year and a
half was all done. to graduate school. What'd you
finish in? American history.
I went to graduate school at Berkeley. I was in
history there. And after I got a master's degree,
and in the process of doing that, I knew I didn't
want to become a teacher. This guy that I got my
master's with was, he kept asking me what I was
going to do, because I told him I didn't want to be a
teacher, and he told me that the library school was
looking for men. So I went to the library school,
and I got a library degree in 1950.
And then I went to work at Caltech, and I was the
assistant librarian there for a couple of years. I
was there for five years. And the library school
started a doctoral program, and I was invited to
come back to participate in that. And they gave me
a, I was a teaching fellow or something at that sort
of library school. really bored, I decided I
didn't want to do it. For one thing, I didn't
believe in a doctorate for librarians. That was a
waste of time. So, one of the instructors in the
library school was the ex-wife of the director of
the University of California Press. And she told
me that they were looking for people And I went down
and talked to the director, and he hired me, and I
was the assistant to the director.
And the director was? August Peruget. F-R-U-G-E
with an accent over the E. And tell me something
about the University of California Press. Okay.
It was founded, I believe, in 1893, and And it would
have been one of the earliest? It was among the
earliest, yes, along with Chicago, Johns
Hopkins, and Columbia. So it could have been one of
the first public universities. It may have been
the first public. I think that's right. That's
interesting. Yeah. Chicago is the oldest.
Oldest, yeah. It's a couple of years older. Well,
Chicago was founded in 1893. Well,
maybe I've got Cal five years too soon, but I know
that Cal was started before the turn of the
century, and I know Chicago is the oldest
university press in the United States. and
Thorstein Bedman, and Bedman went to teach at
Chicago in 93 when it opened, I believe is correct.
I think that's correct. I'll have to check that.
Anyway, okay. So, and what kind of format or what
was the California Press doing? Anything in terms
of characterizing it? Well, this was, I went there
in 1956. And this was a big time for university
presses. There was this legislation that federal
money was going into libraries to support book
purchases. And university presses were
expanding at a ferocious rate. This was a great
decade. The 50s into the 60s was a great time for
university presses.
Among other things, I think that the University of
Texas was founded in this period.
And many other universities began their
publishing programs in this period. For South
Carolina and Texas also. Yes. I think South
Carolina was already established by then. LSU was
older. LSU was 20s or 30s. Do you know? It's
possible. We'll come back to that in a minute. But
anyway. I think we can look for some of that stuff.
So this was good. That's a way to mention that. This
was a good time for the university press expansion
and so forth. And there were a great number of
people my age who were recruited at this time. Most
of us had no previous publishing experience. We
learned on the job. And that's what I got. I started
out as assistant to the director and I became an
assistant director. And I had, I got to do
everything. For a while I was a copy editor. I did
everything but the actual direct sale and
selling. I never hit the bookstore. But I ended up
being responsible for, as assistant director, I
was responsible for all the activities except the
editing. But I was also an editor. They had what
they called sponsoring editors in California.
And these people were responsible for certain
areas, subject areas. And I had the local history
mostly. I had the stuff, most of the stuff I had was
what no one else wanted. California had a big list.
California became one of the top two or three in
terms of quantity. Chicago has always been the
first. And
Harvard, Cal were next.
Columbia, Princeton, Yale. Hopkins wasn't very
big, but it became big, and it is now. It's a lot
bigger
now. And how long were you in California? 16 years.
Is that right? Yes. So you left... In the 70s, in the
72 or something like that. Why? Well... And you
went to LSU? More or less, yeah. Okay, well, okay,
hold on, okay. For personal reasons, let's leave
that. I'll tell you after Trinity. All right. And
then... In 1970... four, three or four, I went to
LSU. And I was the executive editor and the sales
and promotion manager. Under? Under Les Filabal.
Charles East had already resigned, and Dick
Wentworth had already gone to Illinois. Philomon
is P-H-I-L-L-I-V-A-U-N? That's close. We can
check this. I have an AAUP
directory. Yeah, I can really get addicted to all
of them. I like these. Turn it off a minute, and I'll
get to that directly. So you go to LSU about 73, and
you're a... I was assistant editor, associate
director. I was executive editor. Executive
editor. And sales and promotion manager. Sales
and promotion. I got it. And what's going on at LSU?
Well, at this time, LSU was growing, was going
fast. And they had the... The old style series.
Yeah, but what's that book called? Something of
fools. Ship of fools. No, not the ship, the other
one. Yeah.
OK, let's turn it back on. OK, so LSU's leading book
right at the moment was The Confederacy of Dunces.
And were you there when that book was published?
Yes. Well, we were negotiating when I was there.
But I think it got published later, in 1980 or
something like that. Or it got the prize in 1980. So
those were good years for LSU. LSU had good years,
50s, 60s, 70s, and maybe still is. And the Old South
series was really classy. Yes.
I think under Philip Baum's direction, the press
has flourished, and it's continued as far as I
know.
You're at LSU now, 73 until when? I was there about a
year and a half. And I believe it was 1974 that Frank
Gordloff approached me about coming to A&M to be
his successor.
Can you tell me a little bit about that approach? He
and I attended one of the national meetings And I
believe this was one that was at Yale. I think
that's what it was. And during that meeting, he
backed me into a corner and told me that he would
like me to apply for the job of associate director
at A&M with the idea of becoming his successor. He
was planning to retire in a couple of years. OK. Why
you? He was a very good friend of August Truget's,
and I, although I never can prove this, I suspect
that he had some conversation at some point with
August Truget about finding a successor, and
August must have recommended me.
He came highly recommended. I got some very good
recommendations from both August Pruget and the
other assistant director at Cal, Bill Lilley, who
was a demon editor. He was terrific as a painter.
But those two both gave me... And let's see, so what
do you think about this approach? Are you
receptive? You can't really say no. Well, you
can't say no to Frank Wardlaw under any
circumstances. And shortly after that, I... And
Phil Vaughan was... In fact, I still have...
Because Frank had written him first. Yes, yes, I
think that's right. I didn't know that. Yeah, I
did. I did. You've got the documents, yeah.
Anyway, then we... Leigh and I went to College
Station, which neither of us had the faintest,
really, idea of where College Station was. The
only thing I knew about College Station was that
that's where John Kimbrough came from for the
national championship football team sometime
before. But I had no idea where it was, where
College Station was. I had a vague idea of where
Austin was, but I'd never been to Texas, ever. And
I'm sure it would have seemed more unusual if we
hadn't spent close to two years in Louisiana.
Yeah. Because that was our first experience with
any southwest, southern, whatever. Yeah, that's
a different world. Both of them are different. Oh,
yes. I'd probably stay in a really different place
than South Louisiana. Oh, yeah. Because we know we
went there from Lafayette. Yeah. Still getting
adjusted. No. Of course, Lafayette's a totally
different place. Oh, yes. Okay, so you came to
College Station, and what happened when you got
there? This is your exploratory. Had you already
accepted? We'd accepted. We came over and were
interviewed again by Frank and Jack Williams. We
were formally offered the job, and we accepted.
What was Williams' role in that positive reviews?
I believe... He was watching and listening and
supporting? Yes, I believe that it would have been
impossible to have gotten the job unless he
concurred. I think that he was very interested in
the press. Yeah, that's what, you know, Joe
Morris, I was reading one of them, and that was one
of the most impressive things with him, is when he
wasn't praying so much, but Williams' great
interest, that really reassured me. Well, I doubt
that it could have happened, that Frank could have
even gone there without William's interest and
strong support. And he did, I don't know whether we
should also mention the fact that several times
during the time that I was there, at the end of
William's career there, he diverted some
donations that came to his office, small amounts
of money, like $10,000, $15,000, and handed them
to the press. Let's reiterate that and make it
clear. So any immediate impression of any of the
press situation at that time? That's a good
question. Sometimes you get interesting
answers. I've got something I'll show you. I wrote
back to one of the people, one of the assistants.
administrative assistant at LSU, my impression
of Texas.
But it was, it was a total, it was completely
outside my experience, and it certainly was
outside Leah's experience. She had never been
exposed to this kind of like world at all. One of the
things that impressed me And I remember the very
first was the extreme, I guess you'd call it,
formality. All the, all the, you could identify
all the faculty members, I thought, because they
all wore black suits and white ties. Did you
remember that? Well, I certainly, that was, you
could, just every one of them, it seemed like. And
it began to change. during the decade that I was
there, pretty soon it wasn't, you couldn't do that
anymore. But it seemed like... That's
interesting, yeah. It was almost like a uniform,
for heaven's sake. Yeah. No, I don't mean that. I
guess I keep thinking of Lloyd Taylor in history,
who was so different, you know, I guess. But
anyway, history was a different problem the rest
of it. That's interesting. And the other thing
that the... The thing that neither of us was aware
of was... Of course, you had been in California.
Yes, yes. And A&M was in the backwater of all the
social, cultural change. Yes. That's true.
That's correct. Okay, I got you. Yeah. The other
thing that I couldn't, that was odd, was that
every... faculty member with, there was a very
insistence on doctor. And at California, it was
all Mr. or Miss or Mrs. There was never, no matter
how many degrees a person had, they never used
them, used the designation job. Yeah, Missouri
was kind of getting in that vogue and all those
things. Yeah, yeah. That's interesting. Okay. So
you and Leah will move to College Station. Yes. Or
Brian, whichever. Yes. When? In September. It had
to be in September, probably. Yeah, I believe it
was September. And it must have been 70. You
probably started September the 1st, 1977? No. Oh,
no, no. 70. 75 or something like that. I'll check up
there. I know that. That's got to be on the record. I
don't know. Yeah, it is. I keep Seventy, it must
have been seventy-five. Yeah, it had to be. I think
it was seventy-five. Yeah, because the pressed
artists that came the first, seventy-four.
That's, see that, yeah. I mean, and Frank Fedow
wrote that nice piece. Thank goodness he wrote
that in the beginning. That's with chapter one.
Uh-huh. Yeah, yeah, I think that sounds more like
it, Henry. I think it was seventy-five. Okay, and
now when you came, were there any instructions
or... directions or format that the Whitehall
laid out, that here's what we're going to do? No,
there wasn't anything like that. It was either he
assumed
that I was aware of what they wanted to do, or he just
assumed or took all that under his own hat. The
thing he did that I really helped a great deal. He
took me around and introduced me to dozens of
people all over the state. Businessmen,
politicians, other faculty people, authors, and
he also got me into the Texas Institute of Letters,
which I had no reason. I mean,
I think at the time that I was there, there were only
a couple of other people in the Institute of
Letters. One of them was Vandiver. Vandiver hated
it. He had nothing to do with it. And the other was
your colleague. Milton. And as far as I know, those
are the only other ones. And Frank.
Frank was . Was there anything unique or
distinctive or peculiar you thought about?
Wardlaw's relationship to the rest of the world in
Texas. I'm not sure what question I'm asking. I
think he would have been a perfectly successful
politician. I think he had a wider acquaintance
than most politicians. He told me once that one of
the people that impressed him most in his whole
life was LBJ. LBJ kind of overwhelmed him,
frankly. came out second man in that
confrontation. That's good. But he was very
impressed by LBJ, and he had numerous encounters
with him, apparently. Yeah, because that world
seems so unique and pure and distinct, and you
know, there's just a little charisma or something
going there that's strange, and you don't see
that. Frank had a knack for or people for important
people. Important. And he just had a way.
Instinct. Yeah, somehow he could get to it, and I
don't know how the heck he did it. Oh, obviously. Do
you think, what was his role as a director when you
came, and also, I want to define your role as an
associate? Well, there wasn't any question. He
was in charge, and he was really the catalyst of
establishing the reputation of
getting the, he was looking for the authors, and
directing, he raised a lot of And do you think that
was, what was uppermost on his mind in terms of, was
it funding, was he building the funding? I think
funding was, yeah, because he had no, an unlimited
amount of capital to work with, and he had no
assurance of more so far as... No, no, he didn't.
The point about this revolving funding, was that
unique in the publishing business? you know,
setting up those series with all these funds. Oh,
yes, this was all in the wind. This happened over
and over again in that period in the late 50s into
the 60s into the 70s. And he had had tremendous
experience doing this at Texas especially, not so
much South Carolina. That was too early. But this
is all, it was part of the whole of university
presses everywhere. That was a characteristic of
the university press business at that time. That
was not something unique or distinctive to Frank
Washington. No, no, no. Harvard, there's the
Bancroft series in Harvard, and all sorts of odd
things happened with the way the money came.
Sometimes it was sought, and sometimes people
just brought it in and That Bancroft thing at
Harvard, somebody, I think it's Bancroft,
anyway, some couple whose son was killed in World
War II just walked in the door of Wilson's office
and said, we'd like to make a memorial to our son who
loved books.
For that time, it was enormous. Now, Frank's
solicitations were almost invariably $75,000 to
the nation. Why? I don't know. I wish he had been a
little more aggressive, because I think,
considering the influence he had with some of
these people, he could have gotten a lot more. But
that was the number. Any time you saw it? Yes. 75 you
need 75 and then 75 over there he he usually would
would look at it i think his perspective was to say
you need enough to us to do the first book or the
first two books a couple of books and then depend on
income from sales and
some of these uh series it was unrealistic it would
have been better if he'd had bigger amount that
would have allowed a longer term development, a
series of developments. Yeah, because you can
send things bombs, you know, they do that. But he
was an absolute ace at going out and getting, like
you say, 75, 50,000 bucks. Now, and what is your
primary function when you first arrived?
Everything? I was in a learning mode, mostly, and I
The difference between my experience at Cal, the
biggest difference, and at Texas A&M, was that at
Cal, it was a big organization by when it was
depressed then. There were a hundred employees. I
don't think there are that many now, but there
were. It was very diffused. People had little
compartmentalized
responsibilities and the director there was more
of a juggler more of a he was running he was handling
all the sub departments whereas frank ran
everything frank was his own production manager
frank was his own acquisitions frank was his own
salesman